i'm dorothy ridings president of the
league of women voters the sponsor of
tonight's first presidential debate
between republican ronald reagan and
democrat walter mondale tonight's debate
marks the third consecutive presidential
election in which the league is
presenting the candidates for the
nation's highest office in face-to-face
debate our panelists are james we heart
national political correspondent for
scripps howard news service diane sawyer
correspondent for the cbs program 60
minutes and fred barnes national
political correspondent for the
baltimore sun barbara walters of abc
news who is appearing in her fourth
presidential debate is our moderator
barbara thank you dorothy a few words as
we begin tonight's debate about the
format the position of the candidates
that is who answers questions first and
who gives the last statement was
determined by a toss of the coin between
her two candidates mr mondale won and
that means that he chose to give the
final closing statement these two that
the president will answered the first
question first i hope that's clear if it
isn't it will become clear as the debate
goes on sure that the candidates will be
addressed as they each wanted they will
therefore be called president and mazda
mondale since they will also be a second
debate between the two presidential
candidates tonight we focus primarily on
economy and other domestic issues the
debate itself is built around questions
from the panel each of its segments a
reporter will ask the candidates the
same general question then and this is
important each candidate will have the
chance to rebut what the other has said
and the final segment of the debate will
be the closing segment and the
candidates will each have four minutes
for their closing statements and as i
have said mr mondale will be the last
person on the program to speak and now i
would like to add a personal note if i
may as dorothy writings pointed out i
have been involved now in four
presidential debates either as a
moderator or
as a panelist in the past there was no
problem in selecting panelists tonight
however there were to have been four
panelists participating in this debate
the candidates were given a list of
almost 100 qualified journalists from
all the media and could agree and only
these three fine journalists as
moderator and on behalf of my fellow
journalists i very much regret as does
the league of women voters that this
situation has occurred and now let us
begin the debate with the first question
from james we heart mr lee harlan
mr president in 1980 you promised the
american people in your campaign a
balanced budget by 1983 we've now had
more and bigger desserts in the four
years you've been in office mr
president do you have a secret plan to
balance the budget sometime in a second
term term and if so would you lay out
that plan for us tonight
i have a plan not a secret plan as a
matter of fact it is the economic
recovery program that we presented when
i took office in 1981 it is true that
earlier working with some very prominent
economists i had come up during the
campaign with an economic program that i
thought could rectify the great problems
confronting us the double-digit
inflation the high tax rates that i
think were hurting the economy the
stagflation that we were undergoing
before even the election day something
that none of those economists had even
predicted had happened that the economy
was so worsened that i was openly saying
that what we had thought and the basis
of our plan could have brought a
balanced budget no that was no longer
possible so the plan that we have had
and that we're following is a plan that
is based on growth in the economy
recovery without inflation and
reducing the share of the of that the
government is taking from the gross
national product which has become a drag
on the economy already we have a new
cover ii that has been going on for
about 21 months to the point that we can
now call it an expansion under that this
year we have seen a 21 billion dollar
reduction in the deficit from last year
based mainly on the increased revenues
the government is getting without
raising tax rates our tax cut we think
was very instrumental in bringing about
this economic recovery we have reduced
inflation to about a third of what it
was the interest rates have come down
about nine or ten points and we think
must come down further in the last 21
months more than six million people have
gotten jobs we thought there have been
created new jobs for those people to
where there are now a hundred and five
million civilians working where there
were only 99 million before one hundred
and seven if you count the military so
we believe that as we continue to reduce
the level of government spending the
increase rate of increase in government
spending which has come down from 17 to
6 and at the same time as the growth in
the economy increases the revenues the
government gets without raising taxes
those two lines will meet and when they
meet that is a balanced budget
mr president the congressional budget
office has some bad news the lines
aren't about to meet according to their
projections they project that the budget
deficit will continue to climb and in
the year nineteen seven eighty nine they
project that budget deficit of two
hundred and seventy three billion
dollars in view of that and in view of
the economic recovery we are now
enjoying would it make sense to propose
a tax increase or take some other fiscal
measures to reduce that deficit now when
times are relatively good the deficit is
a result it is the result of excessive
government spent
i do not very frankly take seriously the
congressional budget office projections
because they have been wrong and
virtually all of them including the fact
that our recovery wasn't going to take
place to begin with but it has taken
place but as i said we have the rate of
increase in government spending down to
6 if the rate of increase in government
spending can be held at 5
we're not far than there by 1989 that
would have reduced the budget deficits
down to a 30 or 40 billion dollar level
at the same time if we can have a four
percent recovery continue through that
same period of time that will mean
without an increase in tax rates that
will mean 400 billion dollars more in
government revenues and so i think that
the lines can meet actually in constant
dollars in the domestic side of the
budget there has been no spending
increase in the four years that we have
been here mr mondale the carter mondale
administration didn't come close to
balancing the budget and it's four years
in office either despite the fact that
president carter did promise a balanced
budget during his term you have proposed
a plan combining tax increases and
budgetary cuts and other changes in the
administration of the government that
would reduce the projected budget
deficit by two-thirds to approximately
87 billion dollars in 1989 that still is
an enormous deficit that will be running
for these four years what other steps do
you think should be taken to reduce this
deficit and for a position a country for
economic growth one of the key tests of
leadership is whether one sees clearly
the nature of the problems confronted by
our nation and perhaps the dominant
domestic issue of our times is what do
we do
about these enormous deficits i respect
the president
i respect the presidency and i think he
knows that but the fact of it is every
estimate by this administration about
the size of the deficit has been off by
billions and billions of dollars as a
matter of fact over four years they've
missed the mark by nearly 600 billion we
were told we would have a balanced
budget in 1983 it was 200 billion
dollars deficit instead and now we have
a major question facing the american
people as to whether we will deal with
this deficit and get it down for the
sake of a healthy recovery virtually
every economic analysis that i've heard
of including the distinguished
congressional budget office which is
respected by i think almost everyone
says that even with historically high
levels of economic growth we will suffer
a 263 billion dollar deficits in other
words it doesn't converge as the
president suggests it gets larger even
with growth what that means is that we
will continue to have devastating
problems with foreign trade this is the
worst trade year in american history by
far our rural and farm friends will have
continued devastation real interest
rates the real cost of interest will
remain very very high and many
economists are predicting that we're
moving into a period of very slow growth
because the economy is tapering off and
maybe a recession i get it down to a
level below 2 of gross national product
with a policy that's fair i've stood up
and told the american people that i
think it's a real problem that it can
destroy long-term economic growth and
i've told you what i think should be
done i think this is a test of
leadership and i think the american
people know the difference
mr mondale one other way to attack the
deficit is further reductions in
spending the president has submitted a
number of proposals to congress to do
just that
and in many instances the house
controlled by the democrats has opposed
them isn't it one aspect of leadership
for prominent democrats such as yourself
to encourage responsible reductions in
spending and thereby reduce the deficit
absolutely and i have proposed over a
hundred billion dollars in cuts in
federal spending over four years but i
am not going to cut it out of social
security and medicare and student
assistance and things that people need
these these people depend upon all of us
for the little security that they have
and i'm not going to do it that way the
rate of defense spending increase can be
slowed certainly we can find a coffee
pot that costs something less than
$7,000 and there are other ways of
squeezing this budget without constantly
picking on our senior citizens and the
most vulnerable in american life and
that's why the congress including the
republicans have not gone along with the
president's recommendations i would like
to ask the audience please to refrain
from applauding either side it just
takes away from the time for your
candidates and now it is time for the
rebuttal mr president one minute for
rebuttal yes i don't believe that mr
mondale has a plan for balancing the
budget he has a plan for raising taxes
and as a matter of fact the biggest
single tax increase in our nation's
history took place 1977 and for the five
years previous to our taking office
taxes doubled in the united states and
the budgets increased 318 billion
dollars so there is no ratio between
taxing and balancing a budget whether
you borrow the money or whether you
simply tax it away from the people
you're taking the same amount of money
out of the private sector unless and
until you bring down governments share
of what it is taking with regard to
social security i hope there will be
more time than just the
when a minute to mention that but i will
say this a president should never say
never but i'm going to violate that rule
and say never i will never stand for a
reduction of the social security
benefits to the people that are now
getting them well that's exactly the
commitment that was made to the american
people in 1980 he would never reduce
benefits and of course what happened
right after the election is they
proposed to cut social security benefits
by 25 reducing the adjustment for
inflation cutting out minimum benefits
for the poorest on social security
removing educational benefits for
dependents whose widows were trying to
add with widows trying to get them
through college everybody remembers that
people know what happened there's a
difference i have fought for social
security and medicare and for things to
help people who are vulnerable all my
life and i will do it as president of
the united states thank you very much we
will now begin with segment number two
with my colleague diane sawyer sorry mr
president mr mondale the public opinion
of polls do suggest that the american
people are most concerned about the
personal leadership characteristics of
the two candidates and each of you has
questioned the other's leadership
ability mr president you have said that
mr mondale's leadership would take the
country down the path of defeatism and
despair and vice president bush has
called him whining and hoping for bad
news and mr mondale you have said that
president reagan offers showmanship not
leadership that he has not mastered what
he must know to command his government
i'd like to ask each of you to
substantiate your claims mr mondale
first give us specifics to support your
claim that president reagan is a showman
not a leader has not mastered what he
must know to be president after four
years and then second tell us what
personal leadership characteristics you
have that he does not well first of all
i think the first answer this
being suggests exactly what i'm saying
there is no question that we face this
massive deficit and almost everybody
agrees unless we get it down the chances
for long-term healthy growth are nil and
it's also unfair to dump these
tremendous bills on our children the
president says it will disappear
overnight because of some reason no one
else believes that's the case i do and
i'm standing up to the issue with an
answer that's fair i think that's what
leadership is all about there's a
difference between being a quarterback
and a cheerleader and when there's a
real problem a present must confront it
what i was referring to of course in the
comment that you referred to was the
situation in lebanon now for three
occasions one after another our
embassies were assaulted in the same way
by a truck with demolitions the first
time and i did not criticize the
president because these things can
happen once and sometimes twice the
second time the barracks in lebanon were
assaulted as we all remember there was
two or three commission reports
recommendations by the cia the state
department and the others and the third
time there was even a warning from the
terrorists themselves now i believe that
a president must command that white
house and those who work for them it's
the toughest job on earth and you must
master the facts and insist that things
that must be done are done i believe
that the way in which i will approach
the presidency is what's needed because
all my life that has been the way in
which i have sought to lead and that's
why in this campaign i'm telling you
exactly what i want to do i am answering
your questions i'm trying to provide
leadership now before the election so
that the american people can participate
that decision you have said mr mondale
that the polls have given you lower
ratings on leadership than president
reagan because your message has failed
to get through given that you have been
in public office for so many years what
accounts for the failure of your message
to get through well i think we're
getting better all the time and i think
tonight as we contrast for the first
time our differing approach to
government to values to the leadership
in this country i think as this debate
goes forward the american people will
have for the first time a chance to
weigh the two of us against each other
and i think as a process as a part of
that process what i am trying to say
will come across and that is that we
must lead we must command
we must direct and a president must see
it like it is he must stand for the
values of decency that the american
people stand for and he must use the
power of the white house to try to
control these nuclear weapons and lead
this world toward a safer world
mr president the issue is leadership in
personal terms first do you think as
vice president bush said that mr
mondale's campaign is one of whining and
hoping for bad news and second what
leadership characteristics do you
possess that mr mondale does not well
whether he does or not let me suggest my
own idea about the leadership factor and
since you've asked it and incidentally i
might say that regard to these 25 cut
social security before i get to the
answer to your question the only 25 cut
that i know of was accompanying that
huge 1977 tax increase was a cut of 25
in the benefits for every american who
was born after 1916 now leadership first
of all i think you must have some
principles you believe in in mine i
happen to believe in the people and
believe that the people are supposed to
be dominant in our society that they not
government are
to have control of their own affairs to
the greatest extent possible with an
orderly society now having that i think
also that in leadership
well i've believed that you find people
positions such as i'm in who have the
talent and ability to do the things that
are needed in the various departments of
government i don't believe that a leader
should be spending his time in the oval
office deciding who's going to play
tennis on the white house court and you
let those people go with the guidelines
of overall policy not looking over their
shoulder and nitpicking the manner in
which they go at the job you are
ultimately responsible however for that
job but i also believe something else
about that i believe that and when i
became governor of california i started
this and i continue it in this office
that any issue that comes before me i
have instructed cabinet members and
staff they are not to bring up any of
the political ramifications that might
surround the issue i don't want to hear
them i want to hear only arguments as to
whether it is good or bad for the people
is it morally right and on that basis
and that basis alone we make a decision
on every issue now with regard to my
feeling about why i thought that his
record that we spoke his possible taking
us back to the same things that we knew
under the previous administration his
record is that he spoke in praise of
deficits several times said they weren't
to be abhorred that his matter of fact
he at one time said he wished the
deficit could be doubled because they
stimulate the economy and help reduce
unemployment as a follow-up let me draw
in another specific if i could a
specific that the democrats have claimed
about your campaign that it is
essentially based on imagery and one
specific that they allege is that for
instance it recently you showed up at
the opening ceremony of a buffalo
old-age housing project when in fact
your policy was to cut federal housing
for the elderly yet you were there to
have your picture taken with them our
policy was not to cut subsys it
subsidies we have believed in
partnership and that was an example of a
partnership between not only local
government and the federal government
but also between the private sector that
built that particular structure and this
is what we've been trying to do is
involve the federal government in such
partnerships we are today subsidizing
housing for more than 10 million people
and we're going to continue along that
line we have no thought of throwing
people out into the snow whether because
of age or need we have preserved the
safety net for the people with true need
in this country and it has been pure
demagoguery that we have in some ways
shut off all the charitable programs or
many of them for the people who have
real need the safety net is there and
we're taking care of more people then
has ever been taken care of before by
any administration in this country mr
mondale we opportunity for you to be but
well i guess i'm reminded a little bit
of what will rogers once said about
hoover he said it's not what he doesn't
know that's bothers me it's what he
knows for sure just ain't so the fact
that it is the fact that it is the fact
of it is and the president's budget
sought to cut social security by 25
percent it's not an opinion it's a fact
and when the president was asked the
other day what do you want to cut in the
budget he said cut those things i asked
for but didn't get that's social
security and medicare the second fact is
that the housing unit for senior
citizens that the president dedicated in
buffalo was only made possible through a
federal assistance program for senior
citizens that the president's budget
sought to terminate so if he'd had his
way there wouldn't have been any housing
project there at all this administration
has taken a meat cleaver out in terms of
federal assisted housing
and the record is there we have to see
the facts before we can draw conclusions
mr president well let me just respond
with regard to social security when we
took office we discovered that the
program that the carter mondale
administration had said would solve the
fiscal problems of social security for
the next 50 years wouldn't solve them
for five social security was due to go
bankrupt before 1983 any proposals that
i made at that time were at the request
of the chairman a democrat of one of the
leading committees who said we have to
do something before the program goes
break broke and the checks bounced
and so we made a proposal and then in
1982 they used that proposal in a
demagogic fashion for the 1982 campaign
and three days after the election in
1982 they came to us and said social
security we know is broke indeed we had
to borrow 17 billion dollars to pay the
checks and then i asked for a bipartisan
commission which had asked for from the
beginning to sit down and work out a
solution and so the whole matter of what
to do with social security has been
resolved by bipartisan legislation and
it is on a sound basis now for as far as
you can see into the next century
president we begin segment number three
with fred bonds mr president would you
describe your religious beliefs noting
particularly whether you consider
yourself a born-again christian and
explain how these beliefs affect your
presidential decisions well i was raised
to have a faith and a belief and have
been a member of a church since i was a
small boy in our particular church we
did not use that term born-again so i
don't know whether i would fit that that
particular term but i have thanks to my
mother god rest her soul the firmest
possible belief and faith in god and i
don't believe i believe i should say as
lincoln once said that i could not i
would be the most stupid man in the
world if i
thought i could confront the duties of
the office i hold if i could not turn to
someone who was stronger and greater
than all others and i do resort to
prayer at the same time however i have
not believed that prayer should be
introduced into an election or be a part
of a political campaign or religion a
part of that campaign as a matter of
fact i think religion became a part of
this campaign when mr mondale
running-mate said i wasn't a good
christian so it does play a part in my
life i have no hesitancy insane so and
as i say i don't believe that i could
carry on unless i had a belief in a
higher authority and and a belief that
prayers are answered given those beliefs
mr president why don't you attend
services regularly either by going to
church or by inviting a minister to the
white house as president nixon used to
do or or someone to camp david
as president carter used to do the
answer to your question is very simple
about why i don't go to church i start i
have gone to church regularly all my
life and i started to here in washington
and now in the position i hold and in
the world in which we live where
embassies do get blown up in beirut
we're supposed to talk about that in the
on the debate the 21st i understand but
i pose a threat to several hundred
people if i go to church i know the
threats that are made against me we all
know the possibility of terrorism we
have seen the barricades that have had
to be built around the white house and
therefore i don't feel and my minister
knows this and it supports me in this
position i don't feel that i have a
right to go to church knowing that my
being there could cause something of the
kind that we have seen in other places
in beirut for example and i miss going
to church but i think the lord
to refrain from the cause fedya second
question mr mondale would you describe
your religious beliefs and and mention
whether you consider yourself a
born-again christian and explain how
those beliefs would affect your
decisions as president first of all i
accept president reagan's affirmation of
faith i'm sure that we all accept and
admire his commitment to his faith and
we are strengthened all of us by that
fact i am a son of a methodist minister
my wife is the daughter of a
presbyterian minister i don't know if
i've been born again but i know i was
born into a christian family and i
believe i've sung at more weddings and
more funerals than anybody ever to seek
the presidency whether that helps or not
i don't know i have a deep religious
faith our family does it is fundamental
it's probably the reason that i'm in
politics i think our faith tells us it's
strux us about the moral life that we
should lead and i think we all together
on that what bothers me is this growing
tendency to try to use one's own
personal interpretation of faith
politically to question other's faiths
and to try to use the instrumentalities
of government to impose those views on
others all history tells us that that's
a mistake
when the republican platform says that
from here on out we're going to have a
religious test for judges before they're
selected for the federal court and then
jerry falwell announces that that means
they get at least two justices of the
supreme court i think that's an abuse of
our country this nation is the most
religious nation on earth more people go
to church and synagogues than any other
nation on earth and it's because we kept
the politicians and the state out of the
personal exercise of our faith that's
why faith in the united states is pure
and unpolluted by the intervention of
politicians and i think if we want to
continue as i do to have a religious
nation let's keep that line and never
cross it
we have time for rebuttal now i think i
have a follow-up yes i asked you if you
did i'm sorry but you waived it yes
mr mondale the you've complained just
now about jerry falwell and you've
complained other times about other
fundamentalists in politics correct me
if i'm wrong but i don't recall your
ever complaining about ministers who are
involved in the civil rights movement or
in the anti-vietnam war demonstrations
or about black preachers who've been so
involved in american politics is it only
conservative ministers that you object
to no what i object to what i object to
but i object to is someone seeking to
use his faith to question the faith of
another or to use that faith and seek to
use the power of government to impose it
on others a minister who is in civil
rights or in the conservative movement
because he believes his faith instructs
them to do that i admire the fact that
the faith speaks to us and that we are
moral people hopefully i accept and
rejoice in its when you try to use that
to undermine the integrity of private
political or private religious faith and
the use of the state is where for the
most personal decisions in american life
that's where i draw the line thank you
now mr president rebuttal yes it's very
difficult to rebut because i find myself
in so much agreement with mr mondale i
too want that wall what is in the
constitution of separation of church and
state to remain there the only attacks i
have made are on people who apparently
would break away at that wall from the
government side using the government
using the power of the courts and so
forth to hinder that part of the
constitution that says the government
shall not only not establish a religion
it shall not inhibit the practice of
religion and they have been using these
things to have government through court
orders inhibit the practice of religion
a child wants to say
race in its school cafeteria and a court
rules that they can't do it because it's
school property these are the types of
things that i think have been happening
in a kind of a secular way that have
been eroding that separation and i am
opposed to that with regard to a
platform in the supreme court i could
only say one thing about that i don't i
have appointed one member of the supreme
court sandra day o'connor
i'll stand them and record on that and
if i have the opportunity to appoint
anymore i'll do it in the same manner
that i did in selecting her mr mondale
your rebuttal please the platform to
which the president refers in fact calls
for a religious test in the selection of
judges and jerry falwell says that means
we get two or three judges and it would
involve a religious test for the first
time in american life let's take the
example that the president cites i
believe in prayer my family prays we've
never had any difficulty finding time to
pray but do we want a constitutional
amendment adopted of the kind proposed
by the president that gets the local
politicians into the business of
selecting prayers that our children must
either recite in school or be
embarrassed and asked to excuse
themselves who would write the prayer
what would it say how would it be
resolved when those disputes occurred it
seems to me that a moment's reflection
tells you why the united states senate
turned that amendment down because it
will undermine the practice of honest
faith in our country by politicizing it
we don't want that thank you mr mondale
my time is up for this round we go into
the second round of our questioning
begin again
with jim we heart jim after that
discussion this may be like going from
the sublime to the ridiculous but here
goes i have a political question for you
mr mondale
polls indicate a massive change in the
electorate away from the coalition that
has long made the democratic party a
majority blue collar workers young
professionals their children and much of
the middle class now regard themselves
as independents or republican instead of
democrats and the gap the edge the
democrats had in party registration
seems to be narrowing i'd like to ask
you mr mondale what is causing this is
the democratic party out of sync with a
majority of americans and will it soon
be replaced as a majority party by the
republicans what do you think needs to
be done about it as a democrat my answer
is that this campaign isn't over yet and
when people vote i think you're gonna
see a very strong verdict by the
american people that they favor the
approach that i'm talking about the
american people want arms control they
don't want this arms race and they don't
want this deadly new effort for bringing
weapons into the heavens and they want
an american foreign policy that leads
toward a safer world the american people
see this debt and they know it's got to
come down and if it won't come down the
economy is going to slow down maybe go
into a recession they see this
tremendous influx and swapping of cheap
form imports in this country that has
cost over three million jobs given
farmers the worst year in american
history and they know this debt must
come down as well because it's unfair to
our children the american people want
this environment protected they know
that these toxic waste dumps should have
been cleaned up a long time ago and they
know that people's lives and health are
being risked because we've had an
administration that has been totally
insensitive to the law and the demand
for the protection of the environment
the american people want
they're children educated they want to
get our edge back in science and they
want a policy headed by the president
that helps close this gap that's
widening between the united states and
europe and japan the american people
want to keep opening doors they want
those civil rights laws enforced they
want the equal rights amendment ratified
they want equal pay for comparable
effort for women and they want it
because they've understood from the
beginning that when we open doors we're
all stronger just as we were at the
olympics i think as you make the case
the american people will increasingly
come to our cause mr mondale isn't it
possible that the american people have
heard your message and they are
listening but they are rejecting it well
tonight we had the first debate over the
deficit the president says it'll
disappear automatically i've said it's
going to take some work i think the
american people will draw their own
conclusions secondly i've said that i
will not support the cuts in social
security and medicare and the rest that
the president has proposed the president
answers that it didn't happen or if it
did it was resolved later in a
commission as the record develops i
think it's going to become increasingly
clear that what i am saying and where i
want to take this country is exactly
where the country wants to go and the
comparison of approaches is such that i
think will lead to further strength
mr president you and your party are
benefiting from what appears to be an
erosion of the old democratic coalition
but you have not laid out a specific
agenda to take this shift beyond
november 6 what is your program for
america for the next decade with with
some specificity
but again i am running on the record i
think sometimes mr mondale is running
away from his but i'm running on the
record of what we have asked for we'll
continue to try and get things that we
didn't get in the program that has
already brought the rate of spending of
government down from 17 to 6.1 percent
oppose a program of returning authority
and autonomy to the local and state
governments that has been unjustly
seized with the federal government and
you might find those words in a
democratic platform of some years ago i
know because i was a democrat at that
time and i left the party eventually
because i could no longer follow the
turn in the democratic leadership that
took us down an entirely different path
a path of centralizing authority in the
federal government lacking trust in the
american people i promised when we took
office that we would reduce inflation we
have to one-third of what it was i
promised that we would reduce taxes we
did 25 across the board that barely
held even with if it did that much with
the gigantic tax increase imposed in
1977 but at least it took that burden
away from them i said that we would
create jobs for our people and we did
six million in the last 20 or 21 months
i said that we would become respected in
the world once again and that we would
refurbish our national defense to the
place that we could deal on the world
scene and then seek disarmament
reduction of arms and hopefully an
elimination of nuclear weapons we have
done that all of the things that i said
we would do from inflation being down
interest rates being down unemployment
falling all of those things we have done
and i think this is something the
american people see i think they also
know that we have we had a commission
that came in a year ago with a
recommendation on education on
excellence in education and today
without the federal
being involved other than passing on to
them the school districts the words from
that commission we find 35 states with
task forces now dealing with their
educational problems we find that
schools are extending the curriculum to
now have forced teaching of mathematics
and science and so forth all of these
things have brought an improvement in
the college entrance exams for the first
time in some 20 years so i think that
many democrats are seeing the same thing
this democrat saw the leadership isn't
taking us where we want to go mr
president there's a much of what you
said affects the quality of life of many
americans their income the way they live
and so forth but there's an aspect the
quality of life that lies beyond the
private sector which has to do with our
neighborhoods our cities our streets our
parks our environment in those areas i
have a difficulty seeing what your
program is and what you feel the federal
responsibility is in these areas of the
quality of life in the public sector
that affects everybody and even enormous
wealth by one individual can't create
the kind of environment that he might
like there are tasks that government
legitimately should enforce and test the
government performs well and you've
named some of them crime has come down
the last two years for the first time on
many many decades that had has come down
or since we kept records two consecutive
years and last year it came down the
biggest drop in crime that we've had i
think that we've had something to do
with that just as we have with the drug
problem nationwide the environment yes i
feel as strongly as anyone about the
preservation of the environment when we
took office we found that the national
parks were so dirty
and contained so many hazards lack of
safety features that we stopped buying
additional parkland until we had
rectified this with a what was to be a
five-year program but it's just about
finished already a billion dollars and
now we're going back to budgeting for
additional lands for our parks
we have added millions of acres to the
wilderness lands to the game refuges i
think that we're out in front of most
and i see if the red light is blinking
so i can't continue but i got more well
you'll have a chance when your rebuttal
time comes up perhaps mr president mr
mondale now it's your turn to battle the
president says that when the democratic
party made its turn he left it the year
that he decided we had lost our way was
the year that john f kennedy was running
against richard nixon i was chairman of
minnesotans for kennedy president reagan
was chairman of a thing called democrats
for nixon now maybe we made a wrong turn
with kennedy but i'll be supporting him
all of our life all of my life and i'm
very happy that john kennedy was elected
because john kennedy looked at the
future with courage saw what needed to
be done and understood his own
government the president just said that
his government is shrinking it's not
it's now the largest peacetime
government ever in terms of the take
from the total economy and instead of
retreating where we instead of being
strong where we should be strong he
wants to make it strong and intervene in
the most private and personal questions
in american life
that's where government should not be
mr president before i campaigned as a
democrat for a republican candidate for
i had already voted for dwight
eisenhower to be president of the united
so my change had come earlier than that
i hadn't gotten around to re-registering
as yet i found that was rather difficult
to do but i finally did it there are
some other things that have been said
here a backhand you said that i might be
able to dredge them up mr mondale
referred to the farmers worst year the
farmers are not the victims of anything
this administration has done the farmers
were the victims of the double-digit
inflation in the 21 and a half percent
interest rates of the carter mondale
administration and the grain embargo
which destroyed our reliability
nationwide as a supplier all of these
things are presently being rectified and
i think that we are going to salvage the
farmers as a matter of fact the there
has been less than one-quarter of 1 of
foreclosures of the 270,000 loans from
government that the farmers have thank
you mr president will now turn to diane
sawyer for her round of questions diane
and i'd like to turn to an area that i
think few people enjoy discussing but
that we probably should tonight because
the positions of the two candidates are
so clearly different and lead to very
different policy consequences and that
is abortion and right to life i'm
exploring for your personal views of
abortion and specifically how you would
want them applied as public policy first
mr president do you consider abortion
murder or a sin and second how hard
would you work what kind of priority
would you give in your second term
legislation to make abortion illegal and
specifically would you make certain as
your party platform urges that federal
justices that you appoint be pro-life i
have believed that in the appointment of
judges that all that was specified in
the party platform was that they observe
us they respect the sanctity of human
life now that i would want to see in any
judge and with regard to any issue
having to do with human life but with
regard to
and i have a feeling that this is
there's been some reference without
naming it here in remarks mr mondale
tied to injecting religion into
government with me abortion is not a
problem of religion it's a problem of
the constitution
i believe that until and unless someone
can establish that the unborn child is
not a living human being then that the
child is already protected by the
constitution which guarantees life
liberty in the pursuit of happiness to
all of us and i think that this is what
we should concentrate on is trying i
know there was weeks and weeks of
testimony before a senate committee
there were medical authorities there
were religious
there were clerics there everyone
talking about this matter of pro-life
and at the end of all of that not one
shred of evidence was introduced that
the unborn child was not alive we have
seen premature births that are now
grown-up happy people going around also
there is a strange dichotomy in this
whole position about our court's ruling
that abortion is not the taking of a
human life in california some time ago a
man beat a woman so savagely that her
unborn child was born dead with a
fractured skull and the california state
legislature unanimously passed a law
that was signed by the then democratic
governor signed a law that said that any
man who saw abuses a pregnant woman that
he causes the death of her unborn child
shall be charged with murder now isn't
it strange that that same woman could
have taken the life of a run born child
and it was abortion and not murder but
if somebody else does it that's murder
and it recognizes it used the term death
of the unborn child
so this has been my feeling about
abortion that we have a problem now to
determine and all the evidence so far
comes down on the side of the unborn
being a living human being a two-part
follow-up do i take it from what you
said about the platform then that you
don't regard the language and don't
regard and your own appointments
abortion physician a test of any kind
four justices that it should be and also
if abortion is made illegal how would
you want it enforced who would be the
policing units that would investigate
and would you want the the women who
have abortions to be prosecuted the laws
with regarding that always were state
laws it was only when the supreme court
handed down a decision that the federal
government intervened and what had
always been a state policy are laws
against murder are state laws so i would
think that this would be the point of
enforcement on this i as i say i feel
that we have a problem here to resolve
and no one has approached it from that
matter it is it does not happen that the
church that i belong to had that as part
of its dogma i know that some churches
do now it is a sin if you're taking
human life on the same time in our
judeo-christian tradition we recognize
the right of taking human life in
self-defense and therefore i've always
believed that a mother if medically it
is determined that her life is at risk
if she goes through with the pregnancy
she has a right than to take the life of
even her own unborn child in defense of
her own mr mondale de turned to you do
you consider abortion a murder or a sin
and bridging from what president reagan
said he has written that if society
doesn't know whether life does human
life in fact does begin at conception as
long as there is a doubt that the unborn
child should at least be given the
benefit of the doubt and that there
should be protection for that unborn
child this is one of the most emotional
and difficult issues that could possibly
be debated i think your questions
underscore the fact there is probably no
way that government should or could
answer this question in every individual
case and in the private lives of the
american people the constitutional
amendment proposed by president reagan
would make it a crime for a woman to
have an abortion if she had been raped
or suffered from incest is it really the
view of the american people however you
feel on the question of abortion the
government ought to be reaching into
your living rooms and making choices
like this i think it cannot work won't
work and will lead to all kinds of
cynical evasions
of the law those who can afford to have
them will continue to have them the
disadvantage will go out in the back
alley as they used to do i think these
questions are inherently personal and
moral and every individual instance is
different every american should beware
be aware of the seriousness of the step
but there are some things that
government can do and some things they
cannot do now the example that the
president cites has nothing to do with
abortion somebody went to a woman and
nearly killed her that's always been a
serious crime and always should be a
serious crime but how does that compare
with the problem of a woman who's raped
do we really want those decisions made
by judges who've been picked because
they are will agree to find the person
guilty i don't think so and i think it's
going in exactly the wrong direction in
america on basic moral questions we have
always let the people decide in their
own personal lives we haven't felt so
insecure that we've reached for the club
of state to have our point of view it's
been a good
and we're the most religious people on
earth one final point president reagan
as governor california signed a bill
which is perhaps the most liberal
pro-abortion bill of any state in the
union but if i can get you back for a
moment on my point which was the
question of when human life begins a
two-part follow-up first of all at what
point do you believe that human life
begins in the growth of a fetus and
second of all you said that government
shouldn't be involved in the decisions
just those there are those who would say
that government is involved and the
consequence of the involvement was 1.5
million abortions in 1980 and how do you
feel about that the the basic decision
of the supreme court is that each person
has to make this judgment in her own
life and that's the way it's been done
and it's a personal and private moral
judgment i don't know the answer to when
life begins and it's not that simple
either you've got another life involved
and if it's rape how do you draw a moral
judgments on that if it's incest how do
you draw moral judgments on that does
every woman in america have to present
himself herself before some judge picked
by jerry falwell to clear her personal
judgment it won't work
i'm sorry to do this but i really must
talk to the audience you're all invited
guests i know i'm wasting time and
talking to you but it really is very
unfair of you to applaud sometimes a lot
of less loud and i ask you as people who
were invited here and polite people to
refrain we have our time now for
president yes well with regard to this
being a personal choice isn't that what
a murderer is insisting on his or her
right to kill someone because of
whatever fault they think justifies that
now i'm not capable and i don't think
you are any of us to make this
determination that must be made with
regard to human life i am simply saying
that i believe that that's where the
efforts should be directed to make that
determination i don't i don't think that
any of us should be called upon here to
stand and make a decision as to what
other things might come under the
self-defense tradition that too would
have to be worked out then when you once
recognize that we're talking about a
life but in this great society of ours
wouldn't it make a lot more sense in
this gentle and kind society if we had a
program that made it possible for when
incidents come along in which someone
feels they must do away with that unborn
child that instead we make it available
for the adoption there are a million and
a half people out there standing in line
waiting to adopt children we can't have
them any other way mr mondale i agree
with that and that's why i was a
principal sponsor of a liberal adoption
law so that more of these children could
come to term so that the young mothers
were educated so we found an option an
alternative i'm all for that but the
question is whether this other option
proposed by the president should be
pursued and i don't agree with it since
i got about 20 seconds let me just say
one thing the question of agriculture
came a minute ago net farm income is off
50 in the last three years and every
farmer knows it and the effect of these
economic policies is like a massive
grain embargo which has caused farm
exports to drop 20
it's been a big failure i opposed the
green embargo in my administration i'm
opposed to these policies as well i'm
sitting here like the great
schoolteacher letting you both get away
with things because one did it the other
one did it maybe i asked in the future
that the rebuttal stick to what the
rebuttal is and also foreign policy will
be the next debate stop dragging it in
by a zero into this one
now having admonished you i would like
to say to the panel you are allowed one
question and one follow-up would you try
as best you could not to ask two and
three i know it so it's something we all
want to do two or three questions is
part one and two and three is part two
having said that fred it's yours thank
you mr mondale let me ask you about
middle-class americans in the taxes they
pay i'm talking about not about the rich
or the poor i know your views on their
taxes but about families earning twenty
five thousand to forty five thousand a
year do you think that those families
are overtaxed or under taxed by the
federal government in my opinion as we
deal with this deficit people from about
$70,000 a year on down have to be dealt
with very very carefully because they
are the ones who didn't get any relief
the first time around under the 1981 tax
bill people making $200,000 a year got
$60,000 in tax relief over three years
well people making $30,000 a year all
taxes considered got no relief at all of
their taxes actually went up that's why
my proposal protects everybody from
$25,000 a year or less against any tax
increases and treats those 70,000
dollars in under in a way that is more
beneficial than the way the president
proposes with a sales tax or a flat tax
what does this mean in real life well
the other day vice president bush
disclosed his tax returns to the
american people he's one of the
wealthiest americans and he's our vice
president in 1981 i think he paid a
about 40 in taxes in 1983 as a result
of these tax preferences he paid a
little over 12 12.8 in taxes that
meant that he paid a lower percent in
taxes than the janitor who cleaned up
his office or the chauffeur who drives
them to work i believe we need some
fairness and that's why i proposed what
i think is a fair and responsible
proposal that helps protect these people
who've already got no relief or actually
got a tax increase it sounds as if you
were saying you think this group of
taxpayers making twenty five thousand to
forty five thousand a year is already
overtaxed yet your your tax proposal
would increase their taxes i think your
aides have said those earning about 25
to 35 thousand their tax rate would go
up their tax bill would go up a hundred
dollars and from 35,000 to 45,000 more
than that several hundred dollars
wouldn't that a stifle their incentive
to work and invest and so on and it also
hurt the recovery the the first thing is
everybody twenty-five thousand other
would have no tax increase mr regan
after the election is going to have to
propose a tax increase and you will have
to compare what he proposes and his
secretary of the treasury said he's
studying a sales tax or value-added tax
they're the same thing they hit middle
and moderate income americans and leave
wealthy americans largely untouched up
until about $70,000 as you go up the
ladder my proposals will be far more
beneficial as soon as we get the economy
on a sound ground as well i'd like to
see the total repeal of indexing i don't
think we can do that for a few years but
at some point we want to do that as well
mr president let me try this on you do
you think middle-income americans are
overtaxed or under taxed you know i
wasn't going to say this at all but i
can't help it there you go again
i don't have a plan to tax or increase
taxes i'm not going to increase taxes i
can understand why you are mr mondale
because as a senator
you voted sixteen times to increase
taxes now i believe that our problem has
not been that anybody in our country is
under text it's that government is
overfed and i think that most of our
people this is why we had a 25 tax cut
across the board which maintained the
same progressivity of our tax structure
in the the brackets honor and as a
matter of fact it just so happens that
in the quirks of administering these
taxes those above $50,000 actually did
not get quite as big a tax cut
percentage-wise as did those from 50,000
down from 50,000 down those people pay
2/3 of the taxes and those people got
2/3 of the tax cut now the social
security tax of 77 this indeed was a tax
that hit people in the lower brackets
the hardest it had two features it had
several tax increases phased in over a
period of time there are two more yet to
come between now and they eight and 1989
at the same time every year it increased
the amount of money
virtually every year there may have been
one or two that were skipped in there
that was subject to that tax today it is
up to about $38,000 of earnings that is
subject to the payroll tax for social
security and that tax there are no
deductions so a person making anywhere
from 1015 when they're paying that tax
on the full gross earnings that they
have after they have already paid an
income tax on that same amount of money
now i don't think that to try and say
that we were taxing the rich and not the
other way around it just doesn't work
out that way the system is still where
it was with regard to
the with regard to the the progressivity
as i've said and that has not been
changed but if you take it in numbers of
dollars instead of percentage yes you
can say well that person got ten times
as much as this other person yes but he
paid 10 times as much also but if you
take it in percentages then you find out
that it is fair and equitable across the
board i thought i caught mr president a
glimmer of a stronger statement there
and your answer than you've made before
i think the operative position you had
before was that you would only raise
taxes in a second term as a last resort
and i thought you said flatly that i'm
not going to raise taxes is that what
you meant to say that you will not that
you will flatly not raise taxes in your
second term as president yes i adduced
last resort would always be with me if
you got the government down to the
lowest level that you yourself could say
it could not go any lower and still
perform the services for the people and
if the recovery was so complete that you
knew you were getting the ultimate
amount of revenues that you could get
through that growth and there was still
some slight difference there between
those two lines then i had said once
that yes you would have to then look to
see if taxes should not be adjusted i
don't foresee those things happening so
i say with great confidence i'm not
going to i'm not going to go for a tax
with regard to assailing mr bush about
his tax problems and the difference from
the tax he once paid and then the later
tax he paid i think if you looked at the
deductions they were great legal
expenses in there had to do possibly
with the sale of his home and they had
to do with his setting up of a blind
trust all of those are legally
deductions they deducted deductible in
computing your tax and it was a one-year
thing with him mr mondale here we go
again it's time for rebuttal well first
of all i gave him the benefit of the
doubt on the house deal i'm just talking
about the 12.8 that he paid and that's
what's happening all of this country
with wealthy americans they've got so
many loopholes they don't have to pay
much in taxes
now mr president you said there you go
again right remember the last time you
said that mm-hmm you said it when
president carter said that you were
going to cut medicare and you said oh no
there you go again mr president and
what did you do right after the election
you went out and tried to cut twenty
billion dollars out of medicare and so
and i when you say there you go again
people remember this you know and people
will remember that you signed the
biggest tax increase in the history of
california and the biggest tax increase
in the history of the united states and
what are you gonna do
you've got 260 billion dollar deficit
that can't wash it away
you won't slow defense spending you
refuse to do that i'm afraid your time
is that sort mr president yes with
regard to medicare no but it's time for
us to say that medicare is in pretty
much the same condition that social
security was and something is going to
have to be done in the next several
years to make it fiscally sound and no i
never proposed any twenty billion
dollars should come out of medicare i
have proposed that the program we must
treat with that particular problem and
maybe part of that problem is because
during the four years of the carter
mondale administration medical costs in
this country went up eighty seven
percent later we now go to our final
round the way things stand now we have
time for only two sets of questions and
by lot it will be jim and diane and
we'll start with jim we hon mr
president the economic recovery is real
but uneven the census bureau just a
month ago reported that there are more
people living under poverty now a
million more people living under them
when you took office there have been a
number of studies including studies by
the urban institute and other non
political organizations that say that
the impact of the tax and
budget cuts and your economic policies
have impacted severely on certain
classes of americans working mothers
head of households minority groups
elderly poor in fact they're saying the
rich are getting richer and the poor are
getting poorer under your policies what
relief can you offer to the working poor
to the minorities and to the women head
of households who have borne the brunt
of these economic programs what can you
offer them in the future in your next
term well some of those facts and
figures just don't stand up yes there
has been an increase in poverty but it
is a lower rate of increase than it was
in the preceding years before we got
here it has begun to decline but it is
still going up on the other hand the
women heads of household the single
women heads of household have for the
first time there's been a turndown in
the rate of poverty for them we have
found also in our studies that in this
increase in poverty had all had to do
with their private earnings it had
nothing to do with the transfer payments
from government the in my way of many
programs we are spending now 37 percent
more on food for the hungry in all the
various types of programs than was spent
in 1980 we're spending a third more on
all of the but all of the programs of
human service we we have we have more
people receiving food stamps than we're
ever receiving them before two million
three hundred thousand more are
receiving them even though we took eight
hundred and fifty thousand off the food
stamp rolls because they were making an
income that was above anything that
warranted their fellow citizens having
to support them we found people making a
hundred and eighty five percent of the
poverty level we're getting government
benefits we have set a line at a hundred
and thirty percent so that we can direct
that aid down
to the the truly needy sometime ago mr
mondale said something about education
and college students and help with that
kind half one out of two of the
full-time college students in the united
states are receiving some form of
federal aid but there again we found
people that there were under the
previous administration families that
had no limit to income were still
eligible for low-interest college loans
we didn't think that was right and so we
have set a standard that those loans and
those grants are directed to the people
who otherwise could not go to college
their family incomes were so low so
there are a host of other figures that
reveal that the the grant programs are
greater than they have ever been taking
care of more people than they ever have
seven point seven million elderly
citizens who were living in the lowest
20 of earnings seven point seven
million have moved up into another
bracket since our administration took
over leaving only 5 million of the
elderly in that bracket and when there
had been more than 13 million mr
president in a visit to texas and
brownsville i believe it was in the rio
grande valley you did observe that the
economic recovery was uneven in that
particular area of texas unemployment
was over 14 percent whereas statewide it
was the lowest in the country i believe
5.6 percent and you made the comment
that however that man does not live by
bread alone what did you what did you
mean by that comment and is if i
interpret it correctly it it would be a
comment more addressed to the affluent
who who obviously can look beyond just
the bread they need to sustain them with
their wherewithal that had nothing to do
with the other thing of talking about
their needs or anything i remember
distinctly i was segwaying into another
subject i was talking about the things
that have been accomplished and that was
referring to
the revival of patriotism and optimism
the new spirit that we're finding all
over america and it is a wonderful thing
to see when you get out there among the
people so that was the only place that
that was used i did avoid i'm afraid in
my previous answer also the idea of
uneven yes there is no way that the
recovery is even across the country just
as in the depths of the recession there
were some parts of the country that were
worse off but some that didn't even feel
the pain of the recession we are not
going to rest and not going to be happy
until every person in this country who
wants a job can have one until the
recovery is complete
across the country mr mondale the as
you can gather from the question of the
president the celebrated war on poverty
obviously didn't end the problem of
poverty although it may have dented it
the poor and the homeless and the
disadvantaged are still with us
what should the federal government's
role be to turn back the growth in the
number of people living below the
poverty level which is now 35 million in
the united states and to help deal with
the structural unemployment problems
that the president was referring to in
an uneven recovery number one we've got
to get the debt down to get the interest
rates down so the economy will grow and
people will be employed number two we
have to work with cities and others to
help generate economic growth in those
communities through the urban
development action grant program
i don't mind those enterprise zones
let's try them but not as a substitute
for the others certainly education and
training is crucial these young
americans don't have the skills that
make them attractive to employees
they're not going to get jobs the next
thing is to try to get more
entrepreneurship in business within the
reach of minorities so that these
businesses are located in the
communities in which they're found the
other thing is we need the business
community as well as government heavily
involved in these communities to try to
get economic
growth you there is no question that the
poor are worse off i think the president
genuinely believes that they're better
off but the figures show that about 8
million more people are below the
poverty line than four years ago how you
can cut school lunches how you can cut
student assistance how you can cut
housing how you can cut disability
benefits how you can do all of these
things and then the people receiving
them for example the disabled who have
no alternative how they're going to do
i don't know now we need a tight budget
but there's no question that this
administration has singled out things
that affect the most vulnerable in
american life and they're hurting one
final point if i might there's another
part of the lopsided economy that we're
in today and that is that these heavy
deficits have killed exports and are
swapping the nation with cheap imports
we are now 120 billion dollars of
imports 3 million jobs lost and farmers
are having their worst year that's
another reason to get the deficit down
mr mondale is it possible at the vast
majority of americans who appear to be
prosperous have lost interest in the
kinds of programs you're discussing to
help those less privileged than aaron i
think the american people want to make
certain that that dollar is wisely spent
i think they stand for civil rights i
know they're all for education and
science and training which i strongly
support they want these young people to
have a chance to get jobs and the rest i
think the business community wants to
get involved i think they're asking for
new and creative ways to try to reach it
if with everyone involved i think that's
a part of it i think also that the
american people want a balanced program
that gives us long term growth so that
they're not having to take money that's
desperate to themselves and their
give it to someone else i'm opposed to
that too and now it is time for a hearty
bottle for this period mr president yes
the connection that's been made again
between the deficit and the interest
rates there is no connection between
them there is a connection between
interest rates and inflation but i would
call to your attention that in 1981
while we were operating still on the
carter mondale budget that we inherited
that the interest rates came down from
21 and a half down toward the 12 or 13
figure and while they were coming down
that deficits had started their great
increase they were going up now if there
was a connection i think that there
would be a difference parallel between
deficit getting larger and interest
rates going down the interest rates are
based on inflation and right now i have
to tell you i don't think there is any
excuse for the interest rates being as
high as they are because we have brought
inflation down so low i think it can
only be that they're anticipating or
hope expecting not hoping that maybe we
don't have a control of inflation and
it's going to go back up again
well it isn't going to go back up we're
going to see that it doesn't and i
haven't got time mr president if i
heard you correctly you said that these
deficits don't have anything to do with
interest rates i will grant you that
interest rates for too high in 1980 and
we can have another debate as to why
energy prices and so on there's no way
of glossing around that but when these
huge deficits went in place in 1981
what's called the real interest rates
the spread between inflation and what
alone costs you doubled and that's still
the case today and the result is
interest costs that have never been seen
before in terms of real charges and it's
attributable to the deficit everybody
every economist every businessman
believes that your own council of
economic advisors mr fowle steen and
his report told you that every chairman
of the fed
and ways and means committee republican
leaders in the senate and the house are
telling you that that deficit is ruining
the long-term hopes for this economy
it's causing high interest rates it's
ruining us in trade it's given us the
highest small business failure in 50
years the economy is starting downfield
how is it fair you're both very obedient
i have to give you credit for that we
now start our final round of questions
we do not have time for your rebuttal we
start with diane diane sir since we are
reaching the end of the question period
then since in every presidential
campaign the candidates tend to complain
that the opposition candidate is not
held accountable for what people she
says let me give you the chance to do
that mr mondale beginning with you what
do you think the most outrageous thing
is your opponent said in this debate
tonight you want to give me some
well i'm gonna use my time a little
differently i'm gonna give the president
some credit i think the president had
done some things to raise the sense of
spirit morale good feeling in this
country and he's entitled to credit for
that what i think we need however is not
just that but to move forward not just
congratulating ourselves but challenging
ourselves to get on with the business of
dealing with america's problems i think
in education when he lectured the
country about the importance of
discipline i didn't like it at first i
think it helped a little bit but now we
need both that kind of discipline and
the resources and the consistent
leadership that allows this country to
catch up in education and science and
training i like president reagan and
this is not personal
there's there deep differences about our
future and that's the basis of my
campaign follow up in a similar vein
then what remaining question would you
most like to see your opponent force to
answer without any doubt i have stood up
and told the american people that that
263 billion dollar deficit must come
down and i've done what no candidate for
president ever done i told you before
the election what i do mr reagan as you
saw tonight president reagan takes the
position it will disappear by imagine it
was once called voodoo economics
i wish the president would say yes the
cbo is right yes we have a 263 billion
dollar deficit this is how i'm going to
get it done don't talk about growth
because even though we need growth
that's not helping it's going to go in
the other direction as they've estimated
and give us a plan what will you cut
whose taxes will you raise will you
finally touch that defense budget are
you going to go after social security
and medicare and student assistance and
the handicapped again as you did last
time if you just tell us what you're
going to do then the american people
could compare my plan for the future
with your plan and that's the way it
should be
the american people would be in charge
mr president the most outrageous thing
your opponent has said in the debate
tonight well now i have to start with a
smile since his kind words to me i'll
tell you what i think has been the most
outrageous thing in political dialogue
both in this campaign and the one in 82
and that is the continued discussion and
claim that somehow i am the villain who
is going to pull the social security
checks out from those people who are
dependent on them and why i think it is
outrageous first of all it isn't true
but why it is outrageous is because for
political advantage every time they do
that they scare millions of senior
citizens who are totally dependent on
social security have no place else to
turn and they have to live and go to bed
at night thinking is this true is
someone going to take our check away
from us and leave us destitute and i
don't think that that should be a part
of political dialogue now now i
still i just have a minute here okay all
right now
social security let's lay it to rest
once and for all i told you never would
i do such a thing but i tell you also
now social security has nothing to do
with the deficit social security is
totally funded by the payroll tax levied
on employer and employee if you reduce
the outgo of social security that money
would not go into the general fund to
reduce a deficit it would go into the
social security trust fund so social
security has nothing to do with
balancing a budget or erasing or
lowering the deficit now just again to
get to whether i have a man depending on
magic i think i have talked in straight
economic terms about a program of
recovery that was i was told wouldn't
work and then after it worked i was told
that lowering taxes would increase
inflation and none of these things
happened it is working
we're going to continue on that same
line as to what we might do and find in
further savings cuts no we're not going
to starve the hungry but we have 2478
specific recommendations from a
commission of more than 2,000
businesspeople in this country through
the grace commision that we're studying
right now and we've already implemented
17 of them that are recommendations as
to how to make government more efficient
more economic and to keep it even what
remaining question would you most like
to see your opponent forced to answer
why the deficits are so much of a
problem for him now but that in 1976
when the deficit was 52 billion dollars
and everyone was panicking about that he
said no that he thought it ought to be
bigger because a bigger deficit would
stimulate the economy and would help do
away with unemployment in 1979 he made
similar statements the same effect that
that the deficits there was nothing
wrong with having deficits remember
there was a trillion dollars in debt
before we got here that's got to be paid
by our children and grandchildren too if
we don't do it and i'm hoping we can
start some payments on it before we get
through here that's why i want another
four years well we have time now if
you'd like to answer the president's
question or whatever well we just
finished almost the whole debate and the
american people don't have the slightest
clue about what president reagan will do
about these deficits and yet that's the
most important single issue of our time
i did support the 76 measure that he
told about because we were in a deep
recession and we need some stimulation
but i will say as a democrat i was a
real piker mr president in 1979 we ran
a twenty nine billion dollar deficit all
year this administration seems to run
that every morning and the result is
exactly what we see this economy is
starting to run downhill housing is off
report on new purchases it's the lowest
since 1982 item growth is a little over
3 now many people are predicting a
recession and the flow of imports into
this country is swapping the american
people we've got to deal with this
problem and those of us who want to be
your president should tell you now what
we're gonna do so you can make a
judgement thank you very much we must
stop now i want to give you time for
your closing statements it's indeed time
for that from each of you we will begin
with president reagan eyesight mr vega
and i you had your rebuttal and i just
cut you off because we are a timeless
guy you have a chance not for rebuttal
before your closing statement is that
correct no i might as well just go with
you wait now technically you did i have
little voices that come in right here
you don't get those same voices i'm not
hearing it from here i'm hearing it
right waived your rebuttal you can go
with your closing stay well we weren't
included in that four years ago in
similar circumstances to this i asked
you the american people to question i
asked are you better off than you were
four years before the answer to that
obviously was no and as a result i was
elected to this office and promised a
new beginning now maybe i'm expected to
ask that same question again i'm not
going to because i think that all of you
or not everyone those people that have
are in those pockets of poverty and
haven't caught up they couldn't answer
you the way i would want them to but i
think that the most of the people in
this country would say yes they are
better off than they were four years ago
the question i think should be enlarged
is america better off than it was four
years ago and i believe the answer to
that has to also be yes i promised a new
beginning so far it is only a beginning
if the job were finished i might have
thought twice about seeking re-election
to this job but
we now have an economy that for the
first time but let's put it this way in
the first half of 1980 gross national
product was down a minus 3.7 percent
first half of 84 it's up eight and a
half percent productivity in the first
half of 1980 was down a minus two
percent today it is up a plus four
percent personal earnings after taxes
per capita have gone up almost three
thousand dollars in these four years in
1980 or 1979 a person with a fixed
income of $8,000 would was five hundred
dollars above the poverty line and this
maybe explains why there are the numbers
still in poverty by 1980 that the same
person was five hundred dollars below
the poverty line we we have restored
much of our economy with regard to a
business investment it is higher than it
has been since 1949 so there seems to be
no shortage of investment capital we
have as i said cut the taxes but we have
reduced inflation and for two years now
it has stayed down there not a
double-digit but in the range of four or
below we believe that we had also
promised that we would make our country
more secure yes we have an increase in
the defense budget but back then we had
flame planes that couldn't fly for lack
of spare parts or pilots we had navy
vessels that couldn't leave harbor
because of lack of crew or again lack of
spare parts
today were well on our way to a 600 ship
navy we have 543 at present we have our
military the morale is high
i the i think the people should
understand the two-thirds of the defense
budget pays for pay and salary or pay
and pension and then you add to that
food and wardrobe and all the other
things and you only have a small portion
going for weapons but i am determined
that if ever our men are called on they
should have the best that we can provide
in the in the manner of tools and
weapons there has been reference to
expensive spare parts
hammers costing five hundred dollars
well we are the ones who found those i
think we've given the american people
back their spirit i think there's an
optimism in the land and a patriotism
and i think that we're in a position
once again to heed the words of thomas
paine who said we have it in our power
to begin the world over again thank you
mr reagan mr mondale the closing words
are now yours i want to thank the league
of women voters and the city of
louisville for hosting this evenings
debate i want to thank president reagan
for agreeing to debate he didn't have to
and he did and we all appreciate it
the president's favorite question is are
you better off well if you're wealthy
you're better off if you're middle
income you're about where you were and
if you're a modest income you're worse
off that's what the economists tell us
but is that really the question that
should be asked isn't the real question
is will we be better off will our
children be better off are we building
the future that this nation needs i
believe that if we ask those questions
that bear on our future not just
congratulate ourselves but challenge us
to solve those problems you'll see that
we need new leadership
are we better off with this arms race
will we be better off if we start this
star wars escalation into the heavens
are we better off when we de-emphasize
our values and human rights are we
better off when we load our children
with this fantastic debt would fathers
and mothers feel proud of themselves if
they loaded their children with debts
like this nation is now over a trillion
dollars on the shoulders of our children
can we be say really say that we will be
better off when we pull away from sort
of that basic american instinct of
decency and fairness i would rather lose
a campaign about decency than win a
campaign about self-interest i don't
think this nation is composed of people
who care only for themselves and when we
sought to assault social security and
medicare as the record shows we did i
think that was mean-spirited when we
terminated 400,000 desperate hopeless
defenseless americans who were on
disability confused and unable to defend
themselves had just laid them out on the
street as we did for four years i don't
think that's what america is all about
america is a fair society and it is not
right that vice president bush pays less
in taxes than the janitor who helps him
i believe there's fundamental fairness
crying out that needs to be achieved in
our tax system i believe that we will be
better off if we protect this
environment and contrary to what the
president says i think their record on
the environment is inexcusable
and often shameful these laws are not
being enforced
have not been enforced and the public
health and the air and the water are
paying the price that's not fair for our
future i think our future requires a
president to lead us in an all-out
search to advance our education our
learning and our science and training
because this world is more complex and
we're being pressed harder all the time
i believe in opening doors we won the
olympics in part because we've had civil
rights laws and the laws that prohibit
discrimination against women i have been
for those efforts all my life the
president's record is quite different
the question is our future president
kennedy once said in response to similar
arguments we are great but we can be
greater we can be better if we face our
future rejoice in our strengths face our
problems and by solving them build a
better society for our children thank
you thank you sir
to our panel members as well
are you going to oppose this first of
the league of women voters presidential
debates of 1984 you two can go at each
other again in the final league debate
on october 21st in kansas city missouri
and this thursday night october 11th at
9 p.m eastern daylight time the vice
president george bush will debate
congresswoman geraldine ferraro
in philadelphia and i hope that you will
all watch once again no matter what the
format is these debates are very
important we all have an extremely vital
decision to make much more gentlemen our
thanks once more to you our thanks and
now this is barbara walters wishing you
a good evening